Document the schema migration process #270 (#782)
IBM/FHIR: fhir-persistence-schema/docs/DB2SchemaMigration.md

**Table: TENANT_KEYS**

The Tenant Keys table stores a hashed version of the tenant specific key. Upon creating a session and calling the SET_TENANT procedure, the SET_TENANT queries the incoming key against the TENANT_KEYS database to map to a specific tenant MT_ID. 

`AdminSchemaGenerator.addTenantKeysTable` method adds the TENANT_KEYS table, and updates to this table definition requries a change to the setVersion (incrementing by 1).

``` java
this.tenantKeysTable = Table.builder(adminSchemaName, TENANT_KEYS
    .setVersion(2)
    .addIntColumn(        TENANT_KEY_ID,             false)
    .addIntColumn(                MT_ID,             false)
    .addVarcharColumn(      TENANT_SALT,        44,  false)
    .addVarbinaryColumn(    TENANT_HASH,        32,  false)
    .addUniqueIndex(IDX + "TENANT_KEY_SALT", TENANT_SALT)
    .addUniqueIndex(IDX + "TENANT_KEY_TIDH", MT_ID, TENANT_HASH)
    .addPrimaryKey("TENANT_KEY_PK", TENANT_KEY_ID)
    .addForeignKeyConstraint(FK + TENANT_KEYS + "_TNID", adminSchemaName, TENANTS, MT_ID)
    .setTablespace(fhirTablespace)
    .build(model);
```

> Changes to the FHIR_ADMIN schem are not supported.

Reviewer: Sorry, I maybe should have been more specific...was thinking this might be a higher-level statement about all the objects in the admin schema and not specific to the TEANANT_KEYS table

Reviewer: Also, note the missing a in schema.

Author: Fixed

- **Constraint Updates** If there are Foreign Key updates, the changes must be applied manually and reflected in the code base. 
- **Search Parameter Changes (Specification and Tenant)**
    - If the the parameter type or code is changed, the PARAMETERS_NAME and the corresponding table must be updated to remove references to the removed parameter (based on code). 
    - If there is a new SearchParameter with `code` newly added to the system, the Search Parameter value entry is only updated when the resource is updated. 

For each of the above changes, the version of the table must be incremented. 

The resource table stores the FHIR resource as a compressed blob, changes to the specification or extensions should only impact Search values. 

The tables have various indices - PrimaryKey, Index and UniqueIndex. These indices are created as part of the Java object - Table.  These 

If a modification is made to a Search Parameter (addition, removal), then the resource uses the existing search parameter values until a new version of the resource is processed.

Each of these tables has row-level permissions based on the conditional READ-only global variable, such as: 

``` sql

> CREATE PERMISSION FHIRAPP.AUDITEVENT_COMPOSITES_TENANT

Author: ```suggestion
CREATE PERMISSION FHIRDATA.AUDITEVENT_COMPOSITES_TENANT
```

| Project | Description |
|----------|---------------------------------------------|
| `fhir-model` | The HL7 FHIR model - generated Java code |
| `fhir-database-utils` | The SQL/database constructs used to create SQL compliant statements |
| `fhir-persistence-schema` | The code bridges the model and database-utils |

The schema generate the following object types, and require specific managements: 

- DB2 PACKAGE
- TABLESPACES
- SCHEMA 
- GLOBAL VARIABLE 
- INDEX 
- PERMISSION 
- PROCEDURE 
- SEQUENCE 
- TABLE
- TABLE CONSTRAINT 

----------------------------------------------------------------
# Schema: FHIR_ADMIN

The Schema FHIR_ADMIN is an administrative schema. 

## Managing TABLESPACES

There are multiple TABLESPACES used. For the administrative tablesspaces, the `FHIR_TS` tablespace is created with automatic storage.  The tablespace is managed automatically with a default EXTENTSIZE of 4.  

The `FHIR_TS` tablespace is created one time and should not be changed. 

## Managing SEQUENCES

The FHIR_ADMIN schema has a single sequence - `TENANT_SEQUENCE`. 
The sequence is created a single time, and is NOT replaced or upgraded at any point in time. 

> The actions `fhir-persistence-schema` actions - `Allocate Tenant - AddTenantDAO` and `Add Tenant - AddTenantKeyDAO` depend on `next value for`.  These actions, if the sequence is removed, the `TENANT_SEQUENCE` must be manually recreated starting with an integer higher than the `TENANTS.MT_ID` and `TENANT_KEYS.TENANT_KEY_ID` otherwise a conflict with the PRIMARY_KEY in the `FHIR_ADMIN` tables occurs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `fhir-persistence-schema` actions - `Allocate Tenant - AddTenantDAO` and `Add Tenant - AddTenantKeyDAO` depend on `next value for`.  If the sequence is removed, the `TENANT_SEQUENCE` must be manually recreated starting with an integer higher than the `TENANTS.MT_ID` and `TENANT_KEYS.TENANT_KEY_ID` otherwise a conflict with the PRIMARY_KEY in the `FHIR_ADMIN` tables occurs. 
```

The variable privileges (grants) are updated one time, and applied to `FHIRUSER` group.  If you recreate the sequence, you must recreate the `USE` permission. 

## Managing GLOBAL VARIABLE 

The `FHIR_ADMIN.SV_TENANT_ID` is the only variable in the FHIR_ADMIN schema.  The variable is set in `FHIRSchemaGenerator.addVariable`, and should not be updated or removed. 

The variable privileges (grants) are updated one time, and applied to `FHIRUSER` group. 

## Managing TABLE
There are three administrative tables in `FHIR_ADMIN`. These table definitions are more completely described in [DB2MultiTenancy.md](DB2MultiTenancy.md). 

**Table: VERSION_HISTORY**

Before any table or schema object is created, the `VERSION_HISTORY` table is created using `CreateVersionHistory.createTableIfNeeded(adminSchemaName, adapter);`  This table includes VERSION_HISTORY for resources created in the schema. If an object in the schema is updated, then the VERSION_HISTORY table must be updated to track the changes. 

> The `VERSION_HISTORY` table enables Tenant version isolation, so upgrades and patches are separately applied to the schema the tenant belongs. Specifically, if the tenant shares the table definitions with another client, the patching is applied to both tenants at the same time.  If the tenant has a specific schema, the table definitions may be updated independent of each other. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `VERSION_HISTORY` table enables Tenant version isolation, so upgrades and patches are separately applied to the schema to which the tenant belongs. Specifically, if the tenant shares the table definitions with another client, the patching is applied to both tenants at the same time.  If the tenant has a specific schema, the table definitions may be updated independent of each other.
```

`AdminSchemaGenerator.addTenantTable` method adds the TENANT table, and updates to this table definition requries a change to the setVersion (incrementing by 1). A corresponding change must be made to `FHIRSchemaGenerator.addTenantTable` method.

``` java
this.tenantsTable = Table.builder(adminSchemaName, TENANTS)
    .setVersion(1)
    .addIntColumn(            MT_ID,             false)
    .addVarcharColumn(      TENANT_NAME,        36,  false)
    .addVarcharColumn(    TENANT_STATUS,        16,  false)
    .addUniqueIndex(IDX + "TENANT_TN", TENANT_NAME)
    .addPrimaryKey("TENANT_PK", MT_ID)
    .setTablespace(fhirTablespace)
    .build(model);
```

If this table is updated, the changes must be manually apply the migration steps to the `TENANTS` and the corresponding indices. 

**Table: TENANT_KEYS**

The Tenant Keys table stores a hashed version of the tenant specific key. Upon creating a session and calling the SET_TENANT procedure, the SET_TENANT queries the incoming key against the TENANT_KEYS database to map to a specific tenant MT_ID. 

> `AdminSchemaGenerator.addTenantKeysTable` method adds the TENANT_KEYS table, and updates to this table definition requries a change to the setVersion (incrementing by 1).

Reviewer: should the example just below this show the `setVersion` thing?  if not, maybe change the order so that the snippet comes before the comment about `setVersion`.

Author: I forgot to add it! - added inline

``` java
this.tenantKeysTable = Table.builder(adminSchemaName, TENANT_KEYS)
    .addIntColumn(        TENANT_KEY_ID,             false)
    .addIntColumn(                MT_ID,             false)
    .addVarcharColumn(      TENANT_SALT,        44,  false)
    .addVarbinaryColumn(    TENANT_HASH,        32,  false)
    .addUniqueIndex(IDX + "TENANT_KEY_SALT", TENANT_SALT)
    .addUniqueIndex(IDX + "TENANT_KEY_TIDH", MT_ID, TENANT_HASH)
    .addPrimaryKey("TENANT_KEY_PK", TENANT_KEY_ID)
    .addForeignKeyConstraint(FK + TENANT_KEYS + "_TNID", adminSchemaName, TENANTS, MT_ID)
    .setTablespace(fhirTablespace)
    .build(model);
```

> If this table is updated, the changes must be manually apply the migration steps to the `TENANT_KEYS` and the corresponding indices. 

Reviewer: Note sure what this line is trying to say.  Maybe just leave it at "the ADMIN schema is not strictly versioned and so changes to these tables is not supported at this time"?

Author: done

> If the UniqueIndex or ForeignKeyConstraint is removed, the object must be removed. 

Reviewer: Not sure I get this one either

Author: If you remove an UniqueIndex, and have previously applied to a database, you must remove
```suggestion
If the UniqueIndex or ForeignKeyConstraint is removed, and the constraint has been previously applied to a database, the active schema must be updated, and the object must be dropped.
```

## Managing PROCEDURE

> `FHIR_ADMIN.set_tenant` is created in the FHIR_ADMIN schema.  The stored procedure is a 

Reviewer: incomplete

Author: removed

If updates are made to the `set_tenant.sql`, the `FhirSchemaGenerator.buildAdminSchema`'s FhirSchemaConstants.INITIAL_VERSION must be updated to the next highest integer (in this case 2). 

``` java
// The set_tenant procedure can be created after all the admin tables are done
ProcedureDef setTenant = model.addProcedure(this.adminSchemaName, 
    SET_TENANT, 
    FhirSchemaConstants.INITIAL_VERSION, 
    () -> SchemaGeneratorUtil.readTemplate(adminSchemaName, adminSchemaName, SET_TENANT.toLowerCase() + ".sql", null), 
    Arrays.asList(allAdminTablesComplete), 
    procedurePrivileges);
        setTenant.addTag(SCHEMA_GROUP_TAG, ADMIN_GROUP);
```

When the `fhir-persistence-schema` updateProcedure is executed, the READ grant is applied again, and the procedure is updated. The Procedure privilege is reset upon re-executing the action. 

> If you change the stored procedure signature, you MUST drop the stored procedure, before applying the stored procedure to the database. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you change the stored procedure signature, you MUST drop the stored procedure before applying the stored procedure to the database. 
```

Reviewer: Also, is this different than any other stored procedure?
Why is it that it must be dropped instead of updated/replaced in-place?

Author: you may recall we hit this before.  If the method has say three input, and you try dropping it, you must use the specific signature to drop it.  The code currently tries to create a new unique method, leaving two in place, not one.

----------------------------------------------------------------

# Schema: Tenant Data 

The schema is based on the resources and types identified in the `ModelSupport.getResourceTypes()`.  Each resource has a set of supporting tables for FHIR Search Parameters. 

> > ![mt-table.png](mt-table.png)

Reviewer: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/5478798/76721317-148dcc00-6716-11ea-9c2a-52311f94d5b1.png)
What is the `TENANT(1)` under PARTITION?
What is the `TENANT` under FHIR_SEQUENCE?

Author: clarified, and removed...

> > ![mt-table.png](mt-table.png)

Reviewer: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/5478798/76721464-8e25ba00-6716-11ea-868a-2d2dae054123.png)
Why do the search-related tables have both a simple name (e.g. `STRING VALUES`) *and* a real name (e.g. `<RESOURCE>_STR_VALUES`) whereas `RESOURCE` and `LOGICAL RESOURCE` tables do not?

Reviewer: also would be neat if we could move that `Extracted Search Parameter Values` label between the RESOURCE/LOGICAL_RESOURCE tables and the search tables as the current location seems to indicate its a label about how the tables relate to their Indices...

Author: clarified, that was an oversight for the first one. 
the second one is addressed

## Managing the TABLESPACE

> Each tenant receives a tenant specific tablespace. The tablespace is managed automatically with a default EXTENTSIZE of 128.  

Reviewer: probably just my lack of db2 knowledge here, but 128 what?

Author: added

> The schema is created in the multi-tenant schema `CreateSchemas` action, such as `FHIRDATA`.  When the schema is created a base schema is created with `UpdateSchema` action.  The `AllocateTenant` action provisions the schema in the tenant's table space for instance, `TS_TENANT1`.  

Reviewer: Maybe just say its created via `fhir-persistence-schema` and point at the https://github.com/IBM/FHIR/tree/master/fhir-persistence-schema README for this part?

Author: done

Each tenant is allocated a partition based on the MT_ID and assigned to a tablespace. 

> The tenant tablespace is created one time and should not be changed, modified or migrated. 

Reviewer: Why?
Maybe just say "we don't expect it will need to be changed, modified, or migrated"?

Author: There are some hard assumptions on the tablespace.  I'll update the words, but I think it's important to convey the fact it should never be changed in this code.

> The tenant tablespace is created one time and should not be changed, modified or migrated. 

Author: ```suggestion
The tenant `tablespace` is created one time and no changes to the tablespace are expected. 
```

## Managing the SEQUENCES

Each tenant has a two tenant specific sequences. These sequences are created a single time, and are NOT replaced or upgraded at any point in time. 

| Sequence Name | Description |
|----------|---------------------------------------------|

> | `fhir_sequence` | The logical id in the database, used for storing each FHIR Resource |

Reviewer: Maybe a note to indicate that this is different from the resource logical ids?
Maybe something like this:
> Used to assign a database-internal id for each logical FHIR resource. This differs from the `Resource.id` associated with each resource in that its always database-assigned and unique across resource types.

Author: done

| `fhir_ref_sequence` | The reference sequence is a logical id for Parameter Names, Code Systems and Resource Types tables |

The stored procedures `add_resource_type`, `add_parameter_name`, `add_code_system`, and `add_any_resource` use the value to uniquely store the resource or supporting data element. 

> Do not remove any of the tenant sequences, the sequence must provide unique, non-cycled integer values for the persistence layer to work properly. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Do not remove any of the tenant sequences; these sequences must provide unique, non-cycled integer values for the persistence layer to work properly. 
```

| [String](https://www.hl7.org/fhir/r4/search.html#string)<br> [Uri](https://www.hl7.org/fhir/r4/search.html#uri)<br> [Reference](https://www.hl7.org/fhir/r4/search.html#reference)| **`<RESOURCE>`_STR_VALUES** | String Search for FHIR |
| [Token](https://www.hl7.org/fhir/r4/search.html#token) | **`<RESOURCE>`_TOKEN_VALUES** | Token Search for FHIR |
| [Composite](https://www.hl7.org/fhir/r4/search.html#composite) | **`<RESOURCE>`_COMPOSITES** | Token Search for FHIR |
| [Quantity](https://www.hl7.org/fhir/r4/search.html#quantity) | **`<RESOURCE>`_QUANTITY_VALUES** | Quantity Search for FHIR |
| [Positional](https://www.hl7.org/fhir/r4/location.html#positional) | **`<RESOURCE>`_LATLNG_VALUES** | Positional (near) Search for FHIR |

For instance, for VISIONPRESCRIPTION there are: 

```
VISIONPRESCRIPTION_NUMBER_VALUES
VISIONPRESCRIPTION_DATE_VALUES
VISIONPRESCRIPTION_STR_VALUES
VISIONPRESCRIPTION_TOKEN_VALUES
VISIONPRESCRIPTION_COMPOSITES
VISIONPRESCRIPTION_QUANTITY_VALUES
VISIONPRESCRIPTION_LATLNG_VALUES
```

There are also additional tables to support search: `LOGICAL_RESOURCE`, `RESOURCE_TYPES` and `PARAMETER_NAMES` These tables are paritioned, and are specific for each tenant. 

> Each of these tables follows a common pattern, and are defined in the `FHIRResourceTableGroup.java`. 

Reviewer: I suggest removing line 194, or at least moving it elsewhere.  Line 196 seems like it refers back to it, but I think its actually referring to the paragraph before it.

Author: cleaned this up.

    .addVarcharColumn(         STR_VALUE, msb,  true)
    .addVarcharColumn(   STR_VALUE_LCASE, msb,  true)
    .addBigIntColumn(LOGICAL_RESOURCE_ID,      false)
    .addIndex(IDX + tableName + "_PSR", PARAMETER_NAME_ID, STR_VALUE, LOGICAL_RESOURCE_ID)
    .addIndex(IDX + tableName + "_PLR", PARAMETER_NAME_ID, STR_VALUE_LCASE, LOGICAL_RESOURCE_ID)
    .addIndex(IDX + tableName + "_RPS", LOGICAL_RESOURCE_ID, PARAMETER_NAME_ID, STR_VALUE)
    .addIndex(IDX + tableName + "_RPL", LOGICAL_RESOURCE_ID, PARAMETER_NAME_ID, STR_VALUE_LCASE)
    .addPrimaryKey(PK + tableName, ROW_ID)
    .setIdentityColumn(ROW_ID, Generated.BY_DEFAULT)
    .addForeignKeyConstraint(FK + tableName + "_PNID", schemaName, PARAMETER_NAMES, PARAMETER_NAME_ID)
    .addForeignKeyConstraint(FK + tableName + "_RID", schemaName, logicalResourcesTable, LOGICAL_RESOURCE_ID)
    .setTablespace(fhirTablespace)
    .addPrivileges(resourceTablePrivileges)
    .enableAccessControl(this.sessionVariable)
    .build(model);
```

If a new resource is added to the specification, the schema utility automatically provisions it on the next execution of the update schema actions. 

> Common reasons to modify the Resource's tables are: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Common reasons to modify the Resource tables are: 
```

- **Specification Change (Version-to-Version changes)**
    - The Resources are saved as Blobs in the database, and are transparent to the FHIR Version changes. The changes from version-to-version are resilient to field add-remove changes, type changes, and resources additions.  This migration must be done manually.
    - Resource removals must be done manually. 
- **Column Attribute Changes (Space, Value Type)**

>     - As the column types, changes are changed in any column, a specific alter statement must be executed on the table, and constraints must be changed or relaxed. This migration must be done manually.

Reviewer: > As the column types, changes are changed in any column
I didn't get what this was trying to say

Author: I revised

- **Index - Add or Remove or Update**
    - As indices are removed from the table definition, the removed indices must be manually dropped for each Resource table. 
    - As indices are added to the table definition, the version of the table must be updated, and the index must be applied and updated manually.
- **Constraint Updates** If there are Foreign Key updates, the changes must be applied manually and reflected in the code base. 
- **Search Parameter Changes (Specification and Tenant)**

>     - If the the parameter type or code is changed, the PARAMETERS_NAME and the corresponding table must be updated to remove references to the removed parameter (based on code). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - If the the parameter type or code is changed, the PARAMETERS_NAME and the corresponding table must be updated to remove references to the removed parameter (based on `SearchParameter.code`). 
```

>     - If there is a new SearchParameter with `code` newly added to the system, the Search Parameter value entry is only updated when the resource is updated. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - If there is a new SearchParameter (with a new `code`) added to the system, the SearchParameter values are only updated if/when the resource is updated.
```

Reviewer: We should probably have an open issue for this one...we've talked about ways to add a "re-index" feature but it hasn't become a top priority yet.

Author: FHIR Search - Search Re-indexing #789 is now open

For each of the above changes, the version of the table must be incremented. 

The resource table stores the FHIR resource as a compressed blob, changes to the specification or extensions should only impact Search values. 

> The tables have various indices - PrimaryKey, Index and UniqueIndex. These indices are created as part of the Java object - Table.  These 

Reviewer: incomplete

Author: I completed the statement.

> If a modification is made to a Search Parameter (addition, removal), then the resource uses the existing search parameter values until a new version of the resource is processed.

Reviewer: combine this with the statement on line 239?

Author: done.

> Each of these tables has row-level permissions based on the conditional READ-only global variable, such as: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each of these tables has row-level permissions based on the conditional READ-only global variable `SV_TENANT_ID`: 
```

Reviewer: also, what does "conditional" mean in this sentence?

``` sql
CREATE PERMISSION FHIRAPP.AUDITEVENT_COMPOSITES_TENANT
    ON FHIRAPP.AUDITEVENT_COMPOSITES FOR ROWS
    WHERE FHIRAPP.AUDITEVENT_COMPOSITES.MT_ID = FHIR_ADMIN.SV_TENANT_ID 

>     ENFORCED FOR ALL ACCESS ENABLE ;

Reviewer: maybe update `FHIRAPP` to `FHIRDATA` just to match the other examples?

```

> These permissions should not be removed, migrated, altered or changed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For security reasons, these permissions should not be removed, migrated, or altered.
```

## Managing Stored Procedures

> `FHIRDATA.ADD_CODE_SYSTEM` is created in the default schema.  The stored procedures `add_code_system`, `add_parameter_name`, `add_resource_type`, and `add_any_resource`.

Reviewer: What is it trying to say?  Which schema is `add_parameter_name`, `add_resource_type`, and `add_any_resource` in?

Author: I clarified.

If updates are made to the `add_code_system.sql`, the `FhirSchemaGenerator.buildSchema`'s FhirSchemaConstants.INITIAL_VERSION must be updated to the next highest integer (in this case 2). 

``` java
ProcedureDef pd = model.addProcedure(this.schemaName, 
    ADD_CODE_SYSTEM, 
    FhirSchemaConstants.INITIAL_VERSION, 
    () -> SchemaGeneratorUtil.readTemplate(adminSchemaName, schemaName, ADD_CODE_SYSTEM.toLowerCase() + ".sql", null), 
    Arrays.asList(fhirSequence, codeSystemsTable, allTablesComplete), 
    procedurePrivileges);
```

> When the `fhir-persistence-schema` buildSchema is executed, the **INSERT**, **SELECT**, **UPDATE**, **DELETE** grant is applied again, and the procedures are updated. Each Procedure privilege is reset upon re-executing the action. 

Reviewer: What is "buildSchema" ?   I don't see that one mentioned at https://github.com/IBM/FHIR/tree/master/fhir-persistence-schema#execute-the-fhir-persistence-schema-command-line-interface-cli ...is it the same as the `update-proc` action?

Author: I clarified

> If you change the stored procedure signature, you MUST drop the stored procedure, before applying the updated stored procedure to the database. 

Reviewer: Same comment as above...just wondering if this is just a reminder about "normal" procedure stuff or something special about ours.

Author: clarified

## Managing GRANTS

> The Db2 data definition secures data access using `GRANT` predicates, and updated and changed using the `--grant-to` predicate to apply the grants. 

Reviewer: akward change of tense.  maybe something like:
```suggestion
The Db2 data definition secures data access using `GRANT` predicates. To update or change, use the `--grant-to` predicate to apply the grants. 
```

If a grant is removed from the Java code, a manual process must be followed to remove or change the grant for the corresponding tables, procedures and variables. 

## References
The following are useful references for inspecting and understanding the Db2 data definition, and checking the current configurations, and useful links. 

> ### References: SQL Queries

Reviewer: Not sure what belongs here vs on the wiki (e.g. https://github.com/IBM/FHIR/wiki/IBM-FHIR-Server-on-DB2---SQL-Tips)...

Reviewer: I think we should be very choosy about what goes here and we should include information about why you might want to run each of them.

Included are useful queries to debug the Schema. 

#### Tablespace: Check the EXTENTSIZE for a tablespace
**Query**
``` sql
SELECT EXTENTSIZE FROM syscat.tablespaces WHERE tbspace = 'FHIR_TS'
```
**Result**
``` sql
EXTENTSIZE
-----------
          4
  1 record(s) selected.

> ```

Author: ```suggestion

```

> 

Reviewer: Maybe remove this one?  I'm really not sure when you'd want to do it and it doesn't seem germane to managing schema migrations.

Author: it is helpful to check the exntsize, I've removed per your request
